---
layout: post
title: "\'36 craft essays\' - Chuck Palahniuk's writing hints "
date: 2017-05-29 00:17:59 +0200
categories: writing
---
36 Writing Craft Essays by Chuck Palahniuk


!e two most eﬀective ways – that I use – to establish authority are: Honesty and frankness. Or demonstrating knowledge. Heart versus Head


In the %rst method (as demonstrated in the preceding essay) you risk revealing something that makes you look bad. You allow yourself to become the fool instead of the hero. And by doing so, you allow your reader to risk becoming involved, emotionally involved, in your story. In a way, your honesty proves to the reader that the story will not be about proving your glory. You admit your failures and weakness, and doing so lets your reader admit and accept their own. You prove a story – and life – doesn’t have to be about looking good


!e second method for establishing authority is through knowledge: Prove to your reader that you’ve done your research. !at your narrator is the best, most-quali%ed person to tell this story. !is method won’t engage the reader emotionally, not like the Honesty method, but it can be impressive and compelling


Among my favorite books, Jesus’ Son by Denis Johnson has moments of such brutal, un$attering honesty, that I will read it again and again. And feel shocked and touched each time


Among my favorite books, Ill Nature by Joy Williams is %lled with such a burden of horrible data about the destruction of the natural world, that reading it is addictive


Still – Heart or Head – both methods establish the writer or narrator’s authority. !ey engage the reader, and help prove the authenticity of the story


this series of essays is not the perfect way to write %ction. !is is only what works for me. So, please, take or leave anything you read here. If it helps, use it. If not, thank you for considering my view. 7


For homework, pull a few books down oﬀ the shelf and look for examples of the Head or Heart scenes where the author is establishing authority. !ey tend to be early in a book, where the authority is most needed. And where establishing it won’t slow down the escalating plot. 8


write an anecdote that establishes authority using knowledge and data. You might have to do some research to establish a “body of knowledge.” One good method is to meet and casually interview someone about what they know best – typically, what they do for a living. You’ll notice that people always look wonderful – open and animated – when they speak with the authority of their profession


!is second essay is about using a limited number of themes – perhaps the core of what I call Minimalism


!e commercial was doing what a lawyer does in court. What good Minimalist writing should do. It presents a focussed case, a series of images or details that will prompt the viewer to a speci%c decision. In eﬀect: Skipper’s is a good place to eat. Or, Burbank, Washington is a spooky, spooky little town. Only my most-distant relatives still live there, but my grandpa did make the metal street signs. !e old people down the road from us, the Purcells, kept a little monkey they tied to a weeping willow tree in their yard. Summer afternoons, us kids would feed the 16


!is might sound limiting, but once you begin to develop your theme you’ll %nd constant new ways to present it. One of my favorite methods has always been to go out to a party. !ere, I’ll drop the theme into conversation. Crowd seeding. I’ll tell a personal anecdote such as: !ose scary wells from childhood. !en, I can kick back and just listen as everyone gives their own – much better – version of my story. !is way, you have dozens of people $eshing out your theme. Maybe hundreds. And you’ll %nd that theme becomes universal, expanding to touch everyone’s life


For homework, read Amy Hemple’s short story !e Harvest. It’s a beautiful list of details, all steering you along to heartbreak. If you can’t %nd that story, look for her story, In the Cemetery Where Al Jolson is Buried


It’s one thing to engage the reader mentally, to enroll his or her mind and make them think, imagine, consider something. It’s another thing to engage a reader’s heart, to make him or her feel some emotion. But if you can engage the reader on a physical level as well, then you’ve created a reality that can eclipse their actual reality


!is third essay is to demonstrate physical sensation in a story


Words like “searing pain” or “sharp, stabbing pain” or “throbbing headache” or “ecstatic orgasm” don’t evoke anything except some lame-ass paperback thriller book. !ose are the cliches of a cheating writer. Little abstract short-cuts that don’t make anything happen in the reader’s gut. No, you want the pain – or whatever physical sensation – to occur in the reader, not on the page. So un-pack the event, moment by moment, smell by smell


Another method is to inject medical language – the almost-poetry of surgical jargon or diagnostic terms. Anatomical vocabulary. Chemical names. All of those build their authority in a “head” sense, proving you’re smart. Plus, they evoke a physical discomfort or pleasure in the reader


But with sex, it helps if you re-invent the language of sex. Most people have their own pet vocabulary for sex organs and sex acts. To make an orgasm fresh and unique – even if it’s just words happening on a page – invent a way that only your narrator would talk about sex. !at special nickname for their genitals. !eir euphemism for intercourse


For another exercise, write out an event from your past that involved a strong physical sensation. Un-pack it, detail by detail, and create the sensation in the reader’s gut. Again, without using abstract short-cuts that describe the sensation. Always, create the sensation. 27


In contrast, third person stories can feel as if they’re being told by someone too afraid to take responsibility. Still, the problem is – we hate that “I.” !e answer? Use the %rst person voice, but hide the I


So consider writing in the %rst person, but after your %rst draft – take out as many I’s as possible. Or hide them. Change them to “mine” or “me” or “my.” Or switch to the rhetorical second person or even third person. Just get rid of those I’s. My personal demon is any story that starts with “I.” !at instantly turns oﬀ my attention. But that’s just me. Keep that camera pointed away from yourself for as long as possible


In the book/movie Breakfast at Tiﬀanys, the female lead makes money by visiting a criminal in prison, and posing as his niece to convey messages coded to sound like weather forecasts


It seems everything is doomed to go down one happy path. !en Holly Golightly is arrested for carrying those earlier messages. !e predictable plot is wrecked, and the main characters are thrown into crisis. !at’s hiding a gun. Some form of device that you can introduce, then forget, then re-introduce to bring your plot to resolution


Another example is Guts, where the %rst lines of the story tell you: “…this story should last as long as you can hold your breath, then just a little bit longer…” before we spin oﬀ into two distracting stories that will help us forget the “gun


In all these forms, the “gun” is a framing device that helps you limit the length of your story and bring it to crisis before it becomes too long and loses energy


More often, you don’t know your gun. After two hundred pages, you panic because no climax is happening. At that point, you re-read your earlier chapters and %nd a detail or character you’ve forgotten and discarded. With very little re-writing, you can bring that detail back and use it as your gun. To create the chaos you need – the iceberg in Titanic. Or to resolve the chaos you’ve created – the sled in Citizen Kane


After you’ve dissected everything, look for new ways to “hide guns.” Beyond the three types I described – the question, physical process, the clock. !e Road Trip or quest makes a good gun. So does disease. Try to %nd a gun that no one has used. Knock yourself out.


One of my favorites is the grim love story !ey Shoot Horses, Don’t !ey


To start work at the Freightliner Truck plant, I had to bring a sledgehammer I’d never, ever use. !e “required tools list” called for three socket sets in metric and English sizes. It called for a lady-foot pry bar. You had to bring sets of %xed and adjustable crescent wrenches. You had to bring a ball-peen hammer. Two sets of screwdrivers in Phillips and standard-head sizes. A %fty-foot tape measure. Wire cutters. Snub-nosed pliers. Adjustable pliers. Needle-nosed pliers. And vise-grips. And safety glasses. And all of these had to be engraved with your Social Security number and %t into a tool box you could carry from your car in the parking lot, for 157 back-breaking steps to your work station. All these tools cost a total of almost one thousand bucks – money I had to borrow. !en, on the job, the foreman handed you a company-owned speed wrench, and you never touched those shiny new tools you’d lugged to work. Maybe you sat on your tool box during break, but you’d almost never open it


At the opening of this essay, if I’d just said: “Freightliner required you bring a lot of tools you’d never need.” It would’ve seemed abstract and boring. But by ‘unpacking’ the tools, you get the ‘burnt-tongue’ poetic quality of their odd names. And you, the reader, get to decide ‘hey, this is a LOT of tools…


In your own writing, instead of saying: Brian felt sick. Begin with: ‘Maybe it was the mayonnaise. !e sour glop that looked a little yellow where it leaked from between the edges of the ham sandwich. Maybe it was all the shit $ies, buzzing loud as traﬃc, big around as black jellybeans, that swarmed the meat behind the deli counter. Alfalfa sprouts, all wet and crunchy, they’re a breeding ground for ecoli bacteria…’ My point is: Don’t tell your audience too much, too fast. Unpack every detail of the sandwich until your audience feels sick


Often, writers will start with a vague %rst paragraph, then a stronger, detailed second paragraph. Consider scrapping all your weak, opening paragraphs. !en, just begin with a single strong detail and keep adding details until they accumulate to let your reader know what you’d started to tell them with your original !esis Sentence


So much about writing is about timing, and the only way I know to get that right is to read your work out loud for people


!is year, scientists published two studies that prove a reader’s brain reacts to verbs in stories – hitting or kissing or chewing – that same way the brain would react if the reader’s body were actually hitting, kissing or chewing. !e motor cortex of the brain lights up with electrical activity just as if the reader were living the story, performing those actions. !at alone should be enough reason for you to use verbs, to create action and make something happen in every scene or story. 49


I mark the places where people laugh. I mark where the story needs to stop for a moment longer, a pause in the form of a bland chorus or a fragment of $ashback reference (in “Guts” it’s moments like the line: “What even the French won’t talk about…”), these moments where the listeners needed time to comprehend a plot point that isn’t stated by the narrator. Always, always, always, the goal is to bring the listeners to any realization a paragraph before the narrator states it


As homework, %nd a copy of !e Ice At the Bottom of the World by Mark Richard. !is is a collection of the most poetic but dynamic, action-%lled short stories I’ve ever read


In stories like “Strays” and “Her Favorite Story,” Richard plays with sounds the way a musician plays a melody on a piano, repeating the same vowels and consonants to create a music of words – that also tell a compelling story


Now, for homework, ask yourself: “How do I tell time?” Because you don’t use abstracts – hours, minutes, seconds – what do you use in everyday life to tell time? Me, I usually section my morning by cups of coﬀee. !ree cups equal one hour. My shower and shaving equals a half hour. My morning emails, about half an hour


Now, for homework, ask yourself: “How do I tell time?” Because you don’t use abstracts – hours, minutes, seconds – what do you use in everyday life to tell time? Me, I usually section my morning by cups of coﬀee. !ree cups equal one hour. My shower and shaving equals a half hour. My morning emails, about half an hour. Watch yourself and take note of how you tell time. By tasks accomplished – I can write two letters in an hour. By the sun – when the bedroom curtains turn pale blue, then it’s time to get up. By entertainment – driving into town usually takes about three radio songs. Figure out how you tell time, then use this awareness to establish a diﬀerent way for a character to tell time. Some method not your own, a method maybe unique to this character and no one else in the world


If you’re up for a second homework assignment, please look back over the topics discussed this past year – establishing authority, hiding a gun, avoiding ‘thought’ verbs, 57


How often do you stand stock-still with another frozen, paralyzed person and hold a conversation? Maybe only during the hottest moment of the hottest argument you’ve ever had. Maybe never. Probably never. Watch yourself. Watch a movie. Look for the speci%c bits of physical “business” that characters perform as they speak. Look for the tasks that keep their hands busy, and create a distraction from the conversation at hand, thereby adding tension and visual interest to the scene


In my perfect writing trap, it’s like this: Very little distraction (no television or radio); enforced seating; a space foreign to me; a lot of other people engaged in some kind of learning or testing; the minimal comforts are provided; and I can’t easily leave for at least an hour


In all these places, the distractions are minimal. !e environment is disciplined and monitored. Everything is controlled – except my imagination


And it isn’t easy to escape. Especially if you’re sitting between people in the center of a row. Like at work or school, you’re trapped. So you day dream. If you bring a pen and notebook – you write. !at’s when my imagination goes nuts: when it’s the only option I have to entertain myself


Wear the clothes you’d wear to work or church. Make this a real ritual for you – but always take a pen and notebook. Make this little window of time your place to re$ect and imagine. Hunt out the most-boring place you can %nd


For homework, look for places where people tell stories. And look for the “memory cues” that trigger those stories. Consider going to yard sales and asking, “What can you tell me about this baby crib… tea pot… bloody dagger… whatever.” Look for ways to coax good stories from people. Most people are dying to talk, to tell their stories and exhaust their emotions about the past


Most of writing isn’t the brainstorming, exciting $ashes of idea that come so fast. Most of writing is the momentby-moment choice of details that will create your physical reality on the page


A limited number of physical details make up every reality – one smell (on none), one texture, one sound


A limited number of physical details make up every reality – one smell (on none), one texture, one sound. One gesture or nervous tic


What is your character doing when he or she isn’t doing anything


Anytime you want to use a simile, a metaphor will usually work better. Stronger. Instead of: “Being married to Jim was like driving %ve years down a dirt road”… the stronger version is: “Being married to Jim was %ve years of driving down a dirt road.” Or better yet, “Being married to Jim left you shaky as a %ve-year drive down a dirt road


If you have to use a comparison, linger on it, over-do it. I loved doing this in Lullaby. For example, “Her blouse was the same pink as strawberry sherbet, but sherbet served on a green Haviland dessert plate on a tablecloth of Belgian lace beside a window overlooking Paris


!is brings us to three types of words to still avoid: “Like” comparisons. “Is” and “has” verbs (“the dog had a limp” is never has strong as “the dog walked with a limp”)


And, the dreaded “thought” verbs such as, “knew, realized, believed, worried, understood,” that let you spoon feed your reader, instead of letting the reader think


Strike out the word “like,” every time you %nd it


Copy and Compose by Winston Weathers and Otis Winchester


How does a character tell a story, with full knowledge of how it will end, but with the immediacy that keeps the reader in the present moment of the action? Stories are told after the fact. !e teller has already made the journey, and been changed by the process, but the reader has not. So, again, how does the storyteller acknowledge the fact she has survived? She is wise and enlightened. And how does she revert and tell the story from the perspective of the innocent, unenlightened person who has to go back and make the journey with the reader


A paradox of storytelling is: How does a character tell a story, with full knowledge of how it will end, but with the immediacy that keeps the reader in the present moment of the action? Stories are told after the fact. !e teller has already made the journey, and been changed by the process, but the reader has not. So, again, how does the storyteller acknowledge the fact she has survived? She is wise and enlightened. And how does she revert and tell the story from the perspective of the innocent, unenlightened person who has to go back and make the journey with the reader


ground your telling in a tangible scene so you can tease without annoying your reader


To live in a democracy, you must be willing to live as a savior or a slave. To have all or nothing. And you have very little control over that choice


Either way, you’ll be lost. Destroyed. Either by yourself, out of self-hatred. Or by your society because you pose too big a threat. Or… Or, you can choose something diﬀerent. You can learn from the destruction of others. You can create and live into a new system. You can rise above the either/or choice of being a parent versus a child. A savior versus a slave. And you can become an adult, not rebelling against or caving into your culture, but creating a vision of your own and working to make that option into something real


Are you writing a classic rebel-follower-witness story? If not, what kind of myth are you creating? If your work doesn’t seem to %t any classic myth, you might be creating a variation. What myth are you closest to? 97


Now, let’s take a look at some of the ways objects function in stories: Memory Cue: like choruses, an object can echo a past plot point and recreate all the emotion/wisdom of the past. Buried Gun: kept hidden until it’s needed to force a point home. Gesture Prop: allows characters to physically express themselves instead of using only language. !rough-line Image: reoccurring just to add another element of continuity to a story. And now some examples: As a memory cue, think of the big blue necklace that gets the old lady yakking in the movie “Titanic.” !ink of the cruci%x that spurs the $ashback suicide scene in “!e Sentinel.” !is is very standard stuﬀ. !e monkey music box in “Phantom of the Opera.” You’ve seen objects serve this purpose a zillion times. As a buried gun, think of the sled in “Citizen Kane.” Enough said. As a gesture prop, think of the scene in “Harold and Maude” when Bud Cort gives Ruth Gordon a ring (his gesture of union) and she $ings the ring into the ocean (her gesture of un-attachment). In those moments, the two gestures occur with much more power than any lines of dialogue could convey. And notice how the stories you remember best occur as a good mix of gesture and dialogue. As a through-line image: think of that green marble ashtray that appears in each segment of the Stephen King movie “Creep Show.” Sometimes, the ashtray just sits there as set dressing. Sometimes it’s prop. But its appearance adds an odd, hidden continuity to the disparate stories. !e point of this essay is to make you aware of the important objects in your work. If you identify the purpose of each object, you can use it to better eﬀect. Instead of 99


Now, let’s take a look at some of the ways objects function in stories: Memory Cue: like choruses, an object can echo a past plot point and recreate all the emotion/wisdom of the past. Buried Gun: kept hidden until it’s needed to force a point home. Gesture Prop: allows characters to physically express themselves instead of using only language. !rough-line Image: reoccurring just to add another element of continuity to a story


!e point of this essay is to make you aware of the important objects in your work. If you identify the purpose of each object, you can use it to better eﬀect


Myself, I tend to morph my objects through a story. In “Fight Club,” the fat of a bored society becomes soap which is sold for money, then becomes nitroglycerin for power and excitement. In “Invisible Monsters,” the drugs they steal are for money, but also gender reassignment and self-destructive addiction. Each time an object occurs, it can morph into a slightly diﬀerent symbol


If you put an object on the page – use it. If you’re not going to use the object – don’t clutter the page with it. 101


What earlier set-ups will this scene pay oﬀ


Surprise yourself. If you can bring the story – or let it bring you – to a place that amazes you, then you can surprise your reader


When you get stuck, go back and read your earlier scenes, looking for dropped characters or details that you can resurrect as “buried guns


When you reach the end of your life – trust me, you won’t look back and savor the moments you spent alone


!e longer you can allow a story to take shape, the better that %nal shape will be. Don’t rush or force the ending of a story or book. All you have to know is the next scene, or the next few scenes


If you need more freedom around the story, draft to draft, change the character names


!ere are three types of speech – I don’t know if this is TRUE, but I heard it in a seminar and it made sense. !e three types are: Descriptive, Instructive, and Expressive. Descriptive: “!e sun rose high…” Instructive: “Walk, don’t run…” Expressive: “Ouch!” Most %ction writers will only use one – at most, two – of these forms. So use all three. Mix them up. It’s how people talk. Number Ten: Write the book you want to read. Number Eleven: Get author book jacket photos taken now, while you’re young. And get the negatives and copyright on those photos. Number Twelve: Write about the issues that really upset you. !ose are the only things worth writing about. In his course, called “Dangerous Writing,” Tom Spanbauer stresses that life is too precious to spend it writing tame, conventional stories to which you have no personal attachment. !ere are so many things that Tom talked about but that I only half remember: the art of “manumission,” which I can’t spell, but I understood to mean the care you use in moving a reader through the moments of a story. And “sous conversation,” which I took to mean the hidden, buried message within the obvious story. Because I’m not comfortable describing topics I only half-understand, Tom’s agreed to write a book 105


!ere are three types of speech – I don’t know if this is TRUE, but I heard it in a seminar and it made sense. !e three types are: Descriptive, Instructive, and Expressive. Descriptive: “!e sun rose high…” Instructive: “Walk, don’t run…” Expressive: “Ouch!” Most %ction writers will only use one – at most, two – of these forms. So use all three. Mix them up. It’s how people talk


Write about the issues that really upset you. !ose are the only things worth writing about. In his course, called “Dangerous Writing,” Tom Spanbauer stresses that life is too precious to spend it writing tame, conventional stories to which you have no personal attachment


!e one consistent problem I see in most writing students’ work is plotting or pacing. Sometimes too fast, but more often too slow. !is year I’ll focus on methods you might consider for keeping time and characters in motion throughout your work. In the real world, time has the nasty habit of passing. In the %ctional world... time needs some help. !is essay will discuss methods for implying that time has passed in a narrative


Sure, go ahead. Go with the tried and true phrases, “Two hours later, Stephanie still had not called...” Or, “After days of driving, they arrived at a lonely cabin...” Better yet, there’s always the Space Break, but that’s not as clear to a reader. An inch of white page between one paragraph and the next might imply any amount of time. Beyond that, consider some other ways to imply time passing, or to jump your reader around in linear time


You need to keep your facts tight and contained


factual information builds your authority or your narrator’s. It demonstrates that you’ve done your research. If a reader can trust you about the French aristocracy, they can trust you about the big plot twist


an Information Dump allows you to portray the character’s state of mind. You can depict a character’s aspirations or concerns by the facts they summon and obsess over


Remember, most storytelling uses descriptive voice, “Benjamin ate the cake.” Any time you can alternate with instructive voice, “Turn right at Alder Street” you can vary the tone of the narrative and keep it more dynamic, rich and compelling


build a list of truly interesting facts that your character could spout, or mull in his or her mind. Again, make each fact self-contained


Another study – sent to me by readers, and published in big-time medical journals – seems to demonstrate that when a reader reads a verb it stimulates the part of the reader’s brain involved with that actual action


Another study – sent to me by readers, and published in big-time medical journals – seems to demonstrate that when a reader reads a verb it stimulates the part of the reader’s brain involved with that actual action. When you read “kick” it excites the portion of your brain responsible for kicking. !e more physical action verbs you read – kiss, kick, run, jump – the more of your brain is engaged


Another study – sent to me by readers, and published in big-time medical journals – seems to demonstrate that when a reader reads a verb it stimulates the part of the reader’s brain involved with that actual action. When you read “kick” it excites the portion of your brain responsible for kicking. !e more physical action verbs you read – kiss, kick, run, jump – the more of your brain is engaged. Now, consider how many ways we have to communicate with gesture: thumbs up, hitchhiking thumbs, nods, shrugs, sighs, head scratching, nail biting, hair chewing, eye rolling, %nger pointing, %st shaking, %nger down the throat, knuckle biting, winking, blowing a kiss. Make a list, and add to it as you recognize common gestures. Build your vocabulary of gestures and actions


Years ago, during an interview with a well-known, very successful journalist, I asked why she kept squeezing her elbow with the %ngers of her opposite hand. Her eyes sprang open, and her chin jumped up. She blinked a couple times, fast, and stopped touching her elbow, dropping her hands to her lap. As it turns out, she’d been an anorexic for years and still, unconsciously felt the spaces in her elbow joints to determine her current level of body fat. If her index %nger %t into the joint, her body fat was %ve percent. If only her pinky %t, she’d ballooned to eight percent body fat


People say more with their hands than they’d ever risk telling you with their mouths


Neo Nazis telephoned to say that if Joel Grey performed, a sniper in the audience would shoot him on stage. Joel insisted on playing that night, but the word had gotten around to the rest of the cast. !roughout the Portland run, every time Joel crossed the stage, every other actor rushed to the side opposite from him. If he moved downstage, the cast moved far upstage. Every evening was this constant dance to stay away from Joel Grey and any possible sniper bullet


As homework, write your own version of the Jackson and White pieces. Write one from within the framework of some complicated system, a job or bureaucracy. Write a second piece using delusion to accelerate something very every-day until it breaks down to absurdity. Use illness or drugs or sleep deprivation as your device, any stress that will degrade your narrator’s sanity until ordinary events assume profound weight and drama. Remember to enter the story quickly. Like a punk song. Establish your authority by keeping every detail speci%c. Keep your secondary characters vague – make them serve their purpose and make their exit. Build to the absurd, quickly, and get out fast. 126


Growing up, whenever my family got together for a picnic or a birthday, if conversation lagged to silence, someone always said, “It must be seven minutes after the hour...” According to superstition, Abraham Lincoln died at seven minutes past the hour, and since then (folklore says) people always fall silent at that moment, in subconscious grief or honor or whatever


In Snuﬀ, Mister 72 says, “I don’t know.” !at single beat, one sentence, it undermines everything that he’s said previously. One stock phrase he says without thinking. What are the phrases you say without thinking? Again, in Snuﬀ, Sheila says, “True Fact,” which does just the opposite. Instead of undermining herself, her phrase bolsters her authority. She always underlines what she’s said before


Mister 72 automatically cuts himself down. Sheila automatically builds herself up


I’m talking about the moments when you need a beat of time to pass. Possibly to frame a gesture. Or to allow for the reader to rest and recover after a big shock or laugh. In the story Guts, it’s the line “what even the French won’t talk about.” A kind-of throw-away reference to something that came earlier


Nothing I say here is law. !ese are not rules carved into stone. Consider these guidelines more like shirts hanging on a rack in a store: If you like them and they %t, try them on. If they’re comfortable and make you look good, wear them. !e goal is to collect options and techniques you can use as you need them. A wardrobe or tool set or paint box that will always be ready. So, relax


!at said... never, ever use third-person pronouns. At least for the month of July, No !ird-Person Pronouns. No “he said” or “she walked” or “it $ew.” Instead, look at more speci%c ways of referring to a character


consider that everything has multiple names, the least-powerful of which is the usual noun. For example, “Shelley Parker closed the book. !en, Miss Parker dropped the dusty thing on the $oor. !e coy minx bent at the waist to retrieve the crumpled pile of pages


If you’re careful and write with authority you can skate with references based on practically nothing about the character. In Fight Club, as the narrator rails about Big Bob, the narrator refers to him as “the big moosie” and “the big cheese bread.” Neither of these are based on Bob, personally, but portray the narrator’s distain


Ten Little Indians by Agatha Christie, or !e Stepford Wives by Ira Levin. How about the novel/movie Burnt Oﬀerings


this ancient Gothic form – isolate, stress, execute – never changes, and that the success of a story depends on reinventing this ancient storytelling model


you need to know the purpose of each scene or chapter or passage before you write it


ask yourself and be very clear about what earlier questions the current scene will answer. And what new, larger questions will this scene raise


you don’t have to know every plot point before you begin writing, but you should know the current point and focus on making it work


!e moment he stopped talking, someone else expressed the same hidden irritation. !en a third person started carping about vegans. As a storyteller, you’ll recognize that this isn’t about vegans as much as it’s about a shared, unexpressed passion


another reason why I don’t resist changes as my books become %lms. !e highest form of $attery is NOT imitation, it’s seeing your work become a catalyst for other people to express their ideas. With something as diﬃcult to make as a %lm – to %nance and shoot and distribute – unless the actors and director %nd their own passionate attachment to the story, they’ll never complete the process


an insincere promise is a lie is a gun. A crime or secret is a lie is a gun. Yes, okay. It’s arti%cial and manipulative, but a buried lie will save you from writing 800 pages and never %nding your plot climax. Life might seem to drag on and on, but %ction shouldn’t


look for the lies that actual people work double-hard to conceal. People who seem smart are usually trying to hide the fact they feel stupid. Beautiful people are hiding how ugly they feel. Hard-working folks are hiding their inner sense of laziness. All of them will maintain their lie until that’s impossible. !at’s when the fun really starts


Note: My preference is to always begin with a physical action. Gesture always trumps dialogue. Verbs connect with readers in a more immediate way, coming in under our radar and resonating with more basic structures of the brain. Because this is a story, I’ll use present tense to create more immediacy, and less sense of distance between the reader and the on-going action.


Establish the setting through action, the moving ball has to carry our vision to the tombstones and grass to avoid just stating we’re in a cemetery on a sunny day


Note: !e #rst act needs to establish the rivalry between the narrator and Hank. Establish the setting and the activity and important objects


!e black lab runs ahead, sniﬃng at the dead, brown spots in the grass, then adding its piss. !e tennis ball isn’t behind the row of 1870’s graves. Behind the 1860’s, more nothing. Note: Measure distance in a way speci#c to the situation


Walking back through the graves, I drag one foot to wipe it clean on the grass. With the next step, I drag the other foot. Dragging each foot, I leave a trail of $attened skid marks in the lawn all the way to the empty parking lot. Note: Keep the narrator aware of the cumulative sensations of his or her body. Describe the narrator’s walk in terms that will suggest a zombie or monster staggering through a dark setting. And, mention creating a “trail” to foreshadow the up-coming plot point


A black tennis ball, round as the period at the end of a sentence. !e dot at the bottom of an exclamation point. Note: Using a simile is always less eﬀective than stating the quality that’s similar. Instead of “the tennis ball looks like the period at the...” use this moment as a chance to state the qualities of the ball – round, black – then state the similarity to a punctuation mark


First plot point accomplished. !e story has started from something fairly familiar – playing fetch with a tennis ball in a cemetery – and moved to something miraculous, raising lots of questions. Does the reference to rescuing “her” mean Jenny? What will the quest be? How is the tennis ball animated? At this point, the word count is roughly 1500 so there’s room for more details as they might be needed in subsequent revisions. Also, there’s an old method for creating a sympathetic, physical response in the reader: describe either the inside of a character’s mouth or the soles of his feet. Another old saying goes: If you’re going to do something in a story, do it three times. So, here I’m using the soles of the narrator’s feet under three escalating conditions: contact with spit, urine, then bleeding. !is gives a nice balance between the ball writing in black oil, and the narrator marking his journey with a map of red blood


Standing here, my feet dark as hooves or church shoes, so coated with dried blood and dust, all I can do is point at the dirty tennis ball. Except the ball only sits there, not moving, not leading me anywhere, stopped along the edge of the blacktop where the pigweeds begin. Note: Describing the bloody feet is an on-the-body passage. It’s followed by a gesture. Please avoid dialogue if you can use gesture, instead


Jenny leans out her shotgun window, saying, “Don’t make him pissed oﬀ.” She says, “Just get in the car.” Note: Let’s talk about ‘Burnt Tongue.’ You can prompt your reader to stay more focused by misstating something. Especially in dialogue: “Don’t make him pissed oﬀ.” We’ve already demonstrated the anger, with the hostile sound of horns and the engine. !e dialogue merely summarizes that. To make it do more – help characterize Jenny – you can spin her slang any “wrong” way you’d like


Describe your world only as some object or person moves through it. In a #lm, the camera would be the motion, continually pushing through the static landscape, adding a sense of motion to the naturally slow movement of the sun, the wind, the plants. !e added action of the camera would heighten all that and justify the viewers interest. In #ction, consider always introducing your world through the objects that move through it


Nobody’s standing in line to give me any scholarship. Not after my three big, fat D grades Mr. Lockard handed me in Algebra, Geometry and Physics. But I’m almost sure no ball should be able to roll uphill, not forever. No tennis ball can stop perfectly still in one place, then start up bouncing oﬀ by itself. It’s an impossibility, how this ball comes $ying out of nowhere, socking me in the forehead to grab my attention any time I even look away. Note: !e previous paragraph is an example of cutting to “big voice” and leaving the narrative “little voice” scene for a moment. !e goal is to vary the texture of the narrative and imply more time and distance passing


We’re full-on into a fable or tall tale by now. !e language can risk getting looser and more choppy or coarse, anything that will support the chaos and immediate danger of the moment. !e sound of birds, the magpies, stopped to silence. No mosquitoes or buzz of deer $ies. Nothing makes any sound except this ball and my heartbeat in my chest. Both, thudding more and more fast


Another bounce, and the ball clinks against metal. Not a sharp sound, more a clank like hitting a home run oﬀ the gutter of old Mr. Lloyd’s house, or skipping a rock oﬀ the roof of a car parked at Lovers Lane. !e ball hits dirt, hard as if it’s pulled with a magnet, stops, and rolls to one side. And deep in the hole it’s dug, a little brass shines out. !e metal of something buried. !e brass lid of a canning jar, printed Mason, same as your Mom would put up tomatoes inside for the winter. Note: You describe a character by how the character describes his or her world. !e more speci#c, the better. Not “vegetables” but “tomatoes.” Not “the gutter of a house” but “the gutter of Mr. Lloyd’s house.” You can risk these odd extra details because, at this point, your plot is moving so well. People will read along, looking for the next verb


gold coins packed so tight together they don’t rattle. !ey don’t roll. All they do is shine bright as the alloy wheels I’m going to buy to blow Hank’s crap burner car oﬀ the road. Bright as the ring I’ll take Jenny to buy at the Crossroad Mall. Right here in my two hands – and, pow. Note: Ah, money... It represents the ultimate possibility. Money alone is boring, abstract shit, so make it equivalent to a character’s dreams and priorities. Build a character by describing what he or she would do with a new fortune


Note: If you read your work aloud, you learn to love repeating sounds. !e most-fun ones are explosive B’s or P’s. !ey act like a full-stop, and you can really “pop” them into a microphone. “... blood, busted, blasted, bouncing, back...” Like a series of good jabs in boxing


Note: You want a fast way to create tension? Hold a character underwater. It’s worked in a million movies, from “!e Poseidon Adventure” to “Aliens IV.” It worked well in “Guts” and that’s why I don’t want to over-use it, here. But a jar of gold makes a nice symbol for attachment to material possessions and the cost of being greedy


My arms both wrapped around that jar full of gold, I scramble up the creek side, the water squishing in my shoes, and I take oﬀ running through the woods. Note: !is is the end of Act Two, in this draft. !e quest has led to an ethical choice. At this point I’m at roughly 1420 words so I’ll stop. !e goal is 1500 words for the second act, and this gives me some wiggle room in case I need to add another paragraph


Note: To date, we’ve established the three human characters, plus the dog and tennis ball. We’ve established the narrator’s motivation: to win Jenny’s aﬀection. We’ve created the obstacle of Hank, and the counter-motive of the tennis ball… which wants to retrieve some gold coins and do – something unknown with them. At this point, the narrator has stolen the gold and is &eeing with it, trying to escape the tennis ball. Remember to keep all the previous on-the-body details present: the narrator’s bloodied nose, the fact his clothes are soaked with water, his feet are cut and scraped, and the jar of gold feels very heavy


Midway, between one running step and the next, the moment both my legs are stretched out, one in front and the other in back of me, in midair, something slams me in the back. Stumbling forward, I recover, but this something smacks me again, square in my backbone between my shoulder blades. Just as hard, arching my back, something hits me, a third go-round. It hits the back of my head, hard as a foul ball or a bunt in softball. Fast as a line drive fresh oﬀ the sweet spot of a Louisville Slugger, slamming you dead-on, this something hits me another time. Stars and comets swimming in my eyes, I pitch forward still on my feet, running full tilt. Note: Since the ball is behind the narrator, let’s not assume the thing hitting him is the ball. Instead, describe the eﬀect using comparable things which will describe the narrator’s life history: baseball, television, sports, etc. We know the attacker is the tennis ball so this sequence is an opportunity to describe the narrator by how he describes his immediate experience


It keeps bouncing, pile driving its massive impact, drilling me in my gut, slugging my ears while I curl tight to protect my nuts. Note: See how much fun verbs can be? A good action sequence feels like writing for a sports broadcas, just using one dynamic verb after another


Looking up at Jenny, I spit blood. Pink drool leaks out, running down my chin, and my tongue can feel my chipped teeth. One eye almost swelled shut, I say, “Jenny?” I say, “Will you marry me?” !e %lthy tennis ball, waiting. Jenny’s dog, panting in the backseat of the car. My ears glow hot and raw. My lips, split and bleeding, I say, “If I can beat Hank Richardson just one game in tennis, will you marry me?” Note: A character with nothing left to lose can reveal his deepest desire


Jenny $ips a quarter-dollar, and Hanks gets to serve, %rst. His racquet whacks the ball, faster than I can see, into a corner where I could never reach, and Hank gets the %rst point. !e same with his second point. !e same with the whole %rst game. Note: To create tension, we need to suggest that Hank might win. !is will generate more sympathy for the narrator and make the obvious impending plot reversal seem like more of a victory. For a stronger eﬀect, I need to reread the opening of this story and borrow some of that earlier wording to echo the scene where Hank was clearly superior. Just a few well-chosen words can keep that earlier scene present in the reader’s mind


I tell her, “Even if I won, you don’t have to go out with me…” And Jenny says, “Good.” I ask if it would make any diﬀerence if I was rich. And Jenny says, “Are you?” Sitting, alone on the cracked tennis court, the ball looks red, stained with Hank’s blood. I wait and wait, then I shake my head, No. Note: My preference is to limit dialogue, and to con#ne exchanges to a few lines. !e goal is to sort and separate action and speech, because they engage diﬀerent parts of the reader’s mind. And – please – always avoid perfect “tennis match” exchanges where characters respond exactly to what they’ve been asked. If you can resolve a situation with a gesture instead of dialogue – use the gesture


!e tennis ball, sticky with blood, coated with dirt, the ball rolls along at my heels, following me the way Jenny’s dog follows her. Tagging along, the way I used to follow Jenny. !e witch voice says, “How did you %nd them?” But me, I only keep walking away. Note: We’ve ful#lled the social contract. And the narrator has abandoned his childhood goals after #nding they had little value. Jenny was not his salvation. Neither was money. In the next revision it would be good to develop the theme of physical versus metaphysical strength – how at the narrator’s time of greatest in#rmity he wins the tennis contest by trusting in something he can’t explain. Like Luke Skywalker closing his blast shield, becoming blind, then trusting the ‘force.’ People love that shit. Once more, notice that your characters can ask questions, and these don’t have to be answered by another character. Your reader knows the answer
